---
permalink: home.html
title: home
layout: page
weight: 1
isfront: true
---

# Home

The Solo is an audio recorder for unattended, long-term, continuous
environmental monitoring.

The Solo comprises of a mini-computer, a microphone and battery, with
data being stored on a memory card.  It is protected by a weatherproof
enclosure.

A typical deployment would be powered by a standard USB battery bank
which would run the system for five days of permanent recording.  A
12Kg car battery recently powered a Solo for over 40 days.

Recording is split into manageable 10-minute-long files which are
stored on the memory card - grouped into an intuitive folder-per-day
layout.  The recordings are in the .wav format which is compatible
with almost all audio software.

It is simple to prepare (flash) the memory card with the software to
run the Solo, and just as easy to harvest the audio data onto your
desktop/laptop using a card reader.  All software is free to download
and licensed openly.

The basic Solo system is straightforward to assemble, and inexpensive
compared to comparable commercial systems. A basic Solo costs around
120 pounds, but there's a lot of flexibility with components like
microphones, memory cards, batteries etc...

# alternative introduction from old usermanual:

The SOLO is an autonomous outdoor recorder for unattended
environmental monitoring. Battery operated and enclosed in a
weatherproof enclosure, it comprises a microphone, mini-computer and
battery, and is tailored for long-term, continuous recording, with
data being stored on a SD card.

The SOLO is designed to be modular, simple to use and inexpensive. All
components are readily available to purchase commercially, and the
system can be assembled by anyone with a bit of hardware
knowledge. All software is open and free.
