Hardware Clocks
===============

A Hardware Clock (or Real Time Clock / RTC) is a tiny component with a
separate battery that keeps track of time, even when the power is off
to the main device which it serves.  It has a small coin-cell (watch)
battery which typically lasts years.

Note that both types of clock mentioned here are supported in the
Solo, and both work well.  Please do _not_ try to go through any of
the software configuration or installation mentioned on the products'
websites, as this is all done for you already in the Solo.

[HOLE] Once physically installed, it needs to be set for the first
time.  It subsequently is interrogated every time the Raspberry Pi
boots so that the system time can be set within the software of the
Raspberry Pi / Solo.

These clocks do drift from actual time in the world (they aren't
perfect), and should be syncronised periodically (every 6 months?)
depending on the amount of drift.  If exact timing matters to you,
check clock periodically by speaking the time into the microphone, and
then checking the asudio file to see how far out it is.  

Syncing (the same procedure as setting) is inconvenient.  [HOLE -
could use ethernet dongle, and a web interface?  Or better - if it
detects a time-server, it should set the system clock - add to code
that brings up the network device (ifup?) or perhaps ntpd has a hook
to run "hwclock -s" after doing a sync to timeserver.  It is likely
all this code already exists, as PCs must do this all the time.).

Options for hardware clocks
===========================

Two options have been tested and work well:

PiFace Real Time Clock
----------------------

This is well supported and costs around 9 UK pounds.  Needs a separate
coin battery. [Manufacturer's website](http://www.piface.org.uk/products/piface_clock)

It physically installs on pins of the Raspberry Pi quite easily - just
push it into place.  Then set it and forget it.

Note that the PiFace real time clock is a "shim" - it fits snugly
against the circuit board of the Raspberry Pi, and occupies none of
the header pins.  This means it doesn't have any effect on the
enclosure you choose.  It also works well in conjunction with the
Cirrus Logic Audio Card.

These are not intended to be moved once installed against the
Raspberry Pi.  A few remove-install cycles might be fine, but best to
leave alone once in place.

L-shaped Clock
--------------

Can't find a good name or manufacturer name for this component: search
for [DS3231 For Pi](https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=DS3231+for+Pi)
Manufacturer unknown, but they work, and are cheap - particularly
multi-packs of 10 from China and are prepared to wait.  Resellers
closer to you will make a markup, but will be quicker to deliver.

They come with a battery already installed (unlike the PiFace above),
and simply slide onto the connectors on the Raspberry Pi.  They are
supported well in software, and Solo supports them seamlessly.  

I have no evidence of how long the batteries will last.  They are so
cheap, I don't think I'd even try to change the battery, which looks
like it's held in place by a yellow plastic heat-shrink.  

Note that these are NOT compatible with the Cirrus Logic Audio Card,
as they physically conflict with the connectors.  (HOLE - there's a
chance they can be installed instead on the header pins of the CLAC
board, which does pass-through of some raspi GPIOs.  Haven't looked at
this).

