SOLO - Outdoor Audio Recorder
=============================

*** DRAFT ***

##### User Manual

##### last modified: 8 May 2015


The SOLO is an autonomous outdoor recorder for unattended
environmental monitoring. Battery operated and enclosed in a
weatherproof enclosure, it comprises a microphone, mini-computer and
battery, and is tailored for long-term, continuous recording, with
data being stored on a SD card.

The SOLO is designed to be modular, simple to use and inexpensive. All
components are readily available to purchase commercially, and the
system can be assembled by anyone with a bit of hardware
knowledge. All software is open and free.

The SOLO has been developed by James Christie, who can be contacted at
jamie@jamiechristie.com

________________


Introduction
------------

The SOLO is an autonomous outdoor audio recorder for unattended
environmental monitoring.  Battery operated and enclosed in a
weatherproof enclosure, it comprises a microphone, mini-computer and
battery, and is tailored for long-term, continuous recording, with
data being stored on a SD card.

Initially flashed with the software to run the SOLO, the SDcard is
also used to store audio files.  Recording is continuous, and split
into manageable 10-minute sections, further split into folder-per-day
layout.  Larger SD cards allow longer recording times, with 32Gb cards
able to hold around 13 days (64Gb hold 27 days).

The SOLO is powered from a standard USB supply (5V) through a
micro-USB connector commonly used to charge mobile phones and tablets.
Typical deployment would be from a standard USB power bank which would
run the system for 5 days of permanent recording.  Solar, deep-cycle
battery, mains or vehicle powering are all possible, although not
supported currently.

Preparing (flashing) the SD card, and later harvesting the audio data
from it, is simple, although consideration should be given to data
storage back in the office, and a plan for analysis of bulk data is
recommended.

All components live in a waterproof (IP55) outdoor box, except the
microphone, which is weather proof when mounted horizontally.


Anatomy of the SOLO
-------------------

The heart of the SOLO is a minicomputer (raspberry pi) which records
audio from the USB microphone, and stores it on the attached SD card.
The system is powered by a USB battery. The SOLO is operated from
software stored on an SD card, which also stores the recordings. The
minicomputer has a shutdown switch, which signals the system to shut
down cleanly. The microphone is encased in silicone sealant and
protected in a rorbust pipe. A waterproof enclosure is used to enclose
everything except the microphone, which exits the enclosure through a
waterproof opening).

----------------------------------------------------------------------


FIELD GUIDE
===========

Field deployment:
-----------------

You will need: 

  * SOLO unit
  * Charged battery
  * Flashed SD card  (see appendix 1)

	
Steps:
------
1. Ensure that microphone is plugged into minicomputer via the USB
   cable

2. Connect the power cable to the minicomputer (do not connect the
   battery yet)

3. Insert the (flashed) SD card into the minicomputer (take care with orientation)

4. Place the minicomputer into the waterproof enclosure.

5. Attach the battery. 

6. Do it once, with confidence, and do not unplug again once it has
   started. This automatically turns on the minicomputer - you should
   notice a solid red light on the minicomputer, and a flashing green
   light. The green light will eventually (1 minute) settle to a
   ‘heart-beat’ double flash pattern, and which point the device is
   actively recording

7. Place the battery into the box next to the minicomputer and pack
   securely.

8. Close the waterproof enclosure - taking care not to pinch the
   microphone cable.

9. Mount the microphone and waterproof box as desired (mount
   microphone horizontally to avoid water ingress).


Field recovery
--------------

1. (This step is only necessary if the SOLO is still running).  Power
   off the SOLO by depressing the red button on the minicomputer for 2
   seconds.  Notice the green heart-beat change, and finally stop with
   10 deliberate flashes.  The SOLO is now off

2. Unplug the battery from the power cable

3. Remove SD card and store safely (and label it)

4. Replace SD card and/or battery if you are leaving the equipment in
   the field to continue recording, following the steps in ‘Field
   deployment’

----------------------------------------------------------------------

DESK GUIDE
==========



Harvesting audio data from a full SD card
-----------------------------------------

1. Ensure the desktop/laptop is correctly configured to read the data (see Appendix C)

2. Plug the card reader into the desktop/laptop

3. Plug the SD card into the card reader (take care with orientation)

4. Use DiskInternals to look at the files on the card (‘amondata’ directory)

5. Copy the files from the SD card onto the desktop/laptop

6. Remember to make notes about the data, such as where the data was recorded

7. Finished - safely eject the card and label it for re-flashing



Troubleshooting
===============

General points / best practices
-------------------------------

* You will find it increasingly important to keep a careful note of
  the field position, date and times of establishing recording,
  particularly if you are using multiple SOLOs

* Remember that the SOLO software has to be flashed onto each SD card
  before each time that it is inserted into the SOLO (not true, but
  safest).

* Try not to unplug the power cable to the minicomputer unless
  necessary since it is a fragile connection. Instead, unplug the
  power cable at the battery end, which is a larger and stronger
  connection. Ensure that the orientation of the connections is
  correct

* Once the battery is connected to the minicomputer do not unplug it -
  wait until the system has fully booted before you turn it off

* ensure the microphone is mounted horizontally to prevent water
  ingress.

* best policy to detach the battery when inserting/removing the
  SD-card.

* write protect slider on sd-cards should be covered in tape to hold
  in place.

* The flashing software and the harvesting software should be
  installed directly on your Windows PC - installations on network
  drives don’t appear to work.  [ I can’t confirm this, and don’t
  understand why].

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Appendix 1
==========

Preparing your PC for working with the Solo
-------------------------------------------

Before an SD card is used in the Solo, it needs to be ‘flashed’ with the Solo Software 
Image (SSI), which controls the Solo and runs the recordings.  The SSI is available for free to download.

Secondly, - the “flashing” procedure requires a special tool (it can’t just be copied) - this tool is called win32DiskImager, and is available to download.

Finally, to copy audio recordings from a full SD card onto your PC, the tool Linux_Reader is required.

These 3 things need to be done only once, and then you are all set up for good.   Step-by-step guides for each are given below. 


Obtaining the Solo Software Image (SSI)
---------------------------------------


The solo software is packed into a single large file (which is later
flashed) called the SSI.  It is available for download from
www.jdmc2.com/solo/ Right click on the most recent SSI, and dowload to
a preplanned on your PC.  It is about 1GB, so be patient.


The SSI is zipped (compressed) for faster download. To unzip it, right
click on the downloaded file and select “Extract All” from the menu.
The following window prompts you for a destination for the unzipped
file - the suggested location will be fine (in the same folder as the
original).  The unzip process will take a few minutes.  The result
should be a file called “solo-2015-01-01.img” or similar, and should
be around 3Gb in size.


The Solo Software is free and written by James Christie specially for
the Solo.


Obtaining and installing the “flashing” tool (win32diskimager)
--------------------------------------------------------------

This tool is used to prepare an SD card for deployment in the Solo, by
“flashing” the Solo Software Image onto the SDcard using your PC. It
is available for free download from
http://sourceforge.net/projects/win32diskimager


Once downloaded, it should be installed on your PC.  Consider making a
shortcut to this application, which you will use every time you flash
an SD card.  For further information on this tool, you can have a look
at its website.  



Obtaining and installing the “harvesting” tool (Linux_reader)
-------------------------------------------------------------


Having deployed a Solo and returned with an SD card full of audio
recordings, they need to be copied to your PC’s hard drive.  This tool
does that copying.  It is available for free download from
http://www.diskinternals.com/linux-reader


Once downloaded, it should be installed on your PC.  Consider making a
shortcut to it, as it will be used every time you wish to copy audio
from the SD card onto your PC.  Further details of this tool are
available from its website, if you are interested, or need more help.

