
# Solo - Bioacoustic research recorder.

flexible, open-source, self-build field research audio recorder.

The Solo is an outdoor audio recorder for unattended, long-term, and
continuous environmental monitoring and bioacoustic research.

The components for an average system costs about 120 UKP.
Software is freely downloadable, and you assemble the hardware
yourself. 

## Capabilities

A Solo is capable of recording stereo or mono audio at all common
sample rates (16kHz, 32kHz - up to 192kHz).  Recording is continuous
and uninterrupted.  The audio is stored in sensibly sized (10 minutes
default) files, named according to the recording time.  The file
format is the universally understood .wav (16-bit, pcm) format.

Deployments can last from several days (with simple USB battery bank)
to 6 weeeks (with a car battery). Bigger memory cards, and bigger
power sources yeild longer recording times.  Audio is recorded
continuously and uninterruptedly throughout.


## History and exisitng deployments

Solos have been used predominantly for avian surveys, in several
countries, including UK, Cameroon.  Bulk deployments (10 units)
happened in 2015, and now 2016 sees 50+ operational in the field).


### Typical Use

Leaving the lab with a fresh Solo (charged battery, freshly flashed
memory card), the researcher installs the solo in their research
location, turns it on (there is no configuratino on site - that all
happens back in the lab - in preparing the memory card).  Secure the
microphone, ensure waterproofing is good, and plug it in.  A heartbeat
flashing shows the unit is working, and the researcher leaves.  Very
little technical skill is needed for the field aspect of this work.

Retrieval can involve cycling the battery and memory card, or simply
retrieving the unit.

Back in the lab, the memory card is read by a PC/Laptop (Win/Mac/Linux
all supported), and the audio files copied onto more permanent storage
(hard drive).


# What it comprises  (basic system) & fact it can be modified 

The SOLO comprises of a microphone, mini-computer and battery, with
data being stored on a SD card. It is protected by a weatherproof
enclosure. Typical deployment would be from a standard USB power bank
which would run the system for 5 days of permanent recording. A
domestic 12Kg car battery did 6 weeks (and counting). Solar,
deep-cycle battery, mains or vehicle powering are all possible,
although not discussed. Recording is split into manageable 10-minute
sections, further split into folder-per-day layout. Larger SD-cards
allow longer recording times, with 32Gb cards able to hold around 13
days (64Gb hold 27 days). Audio is stored uncompressed in standard
“.wav” format. Audio sample rate is user-configurable – 16kHz and
44.1kHz are common choices.

# Software

The software is available free HERE.  It should be loaded onto the
memory card prior to deployment (see here: how to flash memory card).
This is the opportunity to configure the Solo (sample rate,
mono-stereo) - in the laboratory.  There is no configuration in the
field.  All configuration is stored on the memory cards.

Preparing (flashing) the SD card with the software to run the SOLO and
any user-configuration, and later harvesting the audio data from the
SD-card onto a PC, is simple. Consideration should be given to data
storage back in the office, and a plan for analysis of bulk data is
recommended. The Solo produces a lot of audio data.

# hardware:

The basic SOLO system is straightforward to construct, and inexpensive
compared to comparable commercial systems. The SOLO basic costs around
80 UKP; 120 UKP with waterproofing and some luxuries. Upgrading
microphones and batteries is all possible if desired.

This webpage is intended to demonstrate how to construct and run a
SOLO. In addition, instructional videos are available on a YouTube
channel here, and comments are welcomed on our Facebook page here.
